Overview

What Is NVIDIA NeMo?
NVIDIA NeMo™ is a modular software suite for managing the AI agent lifecycle. It provides microservices and toolkits for data processing, model fine-tuning and evaluation, reinforcement learning, policy enforcement, and system observability. NeMo helps enterprises build, monitor, and optimize agentic AI systems at scale, on any GPU-accelerated infrastructure. It integrates with existing AI platforms and supports cloud, on-premises, and hybrid deployment, enabling enterprises to rapidly manage and effortlessly create data flywheels that continuously optimize AI agents.

New NVIDIA AI Blueprint for Building Data Flywheels
Now available, this new AI blueprint enables developers to build an automated data flywheel that continuously powers your generative and agentic AI applications with more accurate and efficient models.

Try Now
Benefits
Explore the Benefits of NVIDIA NeMo for Agentic AI
Decorative
Modular AI Agent Lifecycle Management
Manage the AI agent lifecycle—from data curation, customization, and evaluation to guardrailing, observability, and optimization—with an enterprise-ready, interoperable software suite.

Decorative
Seamless Deployment and Scaling
Easily build data flywheels that use enterprise data to improve AI agents, powering the entire flywheel with a simple Helm chart deployment or API calls for various parts of the workflow.

Decorative
Increased ROI
Quickly train, customize, and deploy large language models (LLMs), vision-language models (VLMs), video AI, and speech AI at scale, reducing time to solution and increasing ROI.

Decorative
Accelerated Performance
Maximize AI agent performance and throughput with GPU-accelerated optimization, multi-node scaling, and tuning for cost-efficient training, deployment, and continuous improvement.

Decorative
Safer Agentic AI
Build safer agentic AI systems by vetting models, guardrailing prompts, and continuously scanning for vulnerabilities.

Decorative
Production Ready
Deploy into production with a secure, optimized, full-stack solution that offers support, security, and API stability as part of NVIDIA AI Enterprise. 

Build, monitor, and optimize AI agents anywhere—from the cloud and data center to the edge.

Features
Tools for Managing the AI Agent Lifecycle
The AI agent lifecycle is an end-to-end process for developing and improving AI agents in production applications. NVIDIA NeMo provides tools that enable each step of this workflow, so enterprises can build powerful, secure, and continuously learning agents.

The Features of NVIDIA NeMo
Build
Prepare AI-ready data
Process existing multimodal datasets into high-quality, AI-ready formats for development pipelines, and generate synthetic data to close critical data gaps.	
NeMo Curator
Clean, filter, and prepare multimodal data.
NeMo Data Designer
Create domain-specific datasets from scratch.
Select the right model
Pick or build models suited to the use case, validate with academic benchmarks, run custom evaluations, and fine-tune if needed.	
NVIDIA Nemotron
State-of-the-art open multimodal reasoning models.
NeMo Retriever
Extraction, embedding, and reranking models for RAG pipelines.
NeMo Evaluator
Benchmark, test, and evaluate models and agents.
Build your AI agent
Turn your custom model into a scalable application, seamlessly connect it to your enterprise stack and tools, and define workflows with flexible orchestration.	
NeMo Agent Toolkit
Framework-agnostic toolkit to build, profile, and optimize AI agents.
Deploy
Deploy your agent with maximum performance
Optimize your agent for production with high-throughput, low-latency inference, ensuring it can scale to meet enterprise demands and deliver fast, reliable responses.	
NVIDIA NIM
Run AI models in optimized containers, exposed as OpenAI-compatible APIs.
Stay grounded in data and enforce guardrails
Use retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to anchor agent responses in trusted knowledge while applying safety, compliance, and content moderation guardrails.	
NeMo Retriever
Build accurate, privacy-preserving RAG pipelines.
NeMo Guardrails
Enforce safety, compliance, and control across AI interactions.
Optimize
Monitor and collect feedback
Track the agent's real-world interactions with users and other systems. Systematically evaluate its performance and accuracy, finding opportunities to continuously improve.	
NeMo Agent Toolkit
Framework-agnostic toolkit to build, profile, and optimize AI agents.
NeMo Customizer
Fine-tune and align models with domain data.
NeMo Framework
Open-source toolkit for training and aligning LLMs and multimodal models.
Continuously improve with data flywheels
Use the feedback and data gathered from monitoring to create a data-driven flywheel, iteratively retraining the agent to continuously optimize and stay effective over time.	
NeMo RL
Post-train and align models at scale with advanced reinforcement learning techniques.
NeMo Gym
Simulated training environments to generate high-quality agentic RL rollouts.
NeMo Evaluator
Benchmark, test, and evaluate models and agents.
NeMo Customizer
Fine-tune and align models with domain data.
Use Cases

How NeMo Is Being Used
See how NVIDIA NeMo supports industry use cases and jump-starts your AI development.

AI Agents
SDG for Agentic AI
AI Assistant
Information Retrieval
Content Generation
Humanoid Robot
AI Agents
AI agents are transforming customer service across sectors, helping companies enhance customer conversations, achieve high resolution rates, and improve human representative productivity. AI agents can handle predictive tasks, reason and problem-solve, be trained to understand industry-specific terms, and pull relevant information from an organization’s knowledge bases, wherever that data resides.

Learn More About AI Agents
AI Agent for Customer Service





Apptronik

Starting Options
Ways to Get Started With NVIDIA NeMo
Manage the AI agent lifecycle with tools and technologies for building, monitoring, and optimizing AI agents in production.

1
Try NVIDIA-optimized foundation models like NVIDIA Nemotron.

Try Now
2
Build, monitor, and optimize AI agents with NVIDIA NeMo.

Get Started
3
Jump-start building your AI solutions with NVIDIA Blueprints.

Try the Blueprints
Compare Starting Options
Customer Stories
How Industry Leaders Are Driving Innovation With NeMo
More Customer Stories
Worley Deploys NVIDIA NIM Microservices to Transform EPC Business With Agentic AI
Architecture / Engineering / Construction, Energy

Worley Deploys NVIDIA NIM Microservices to Transform EPC Business With Agentic AI
Customer: Worley

Products: NVIDIA AI Enterprise, NVIDIA NIM

Technologies: NVIDIA NeMo Framework, NVIDIA Triton Inference Server

Shell Trains Custom AI Chatbot With NVIDIA NeMo to Uplevel Operations
Featured
Energy

Shell Trains Custom AI Chatbot With NVIDIA NeMo to Uplevel Operations
Customer: Shell

Products: NVIDIA NeMo, NVIDIA NeMo Curator, NVIDIA NeMo Framework

Amdocs Builds Generative AI Agents for Telecom
Telecommunications

Amdocs Builds Generative AI Agents for Telecom
Customer: Amdocs

Products: NVIDIA DGX Cloud, NVIDIA AI Enterprise, NVIDIA Nemotron

Technologies: NVIDIA NeMo framework

Adopters
Leading Adopters Across All Industries
Customers
Partners
AI Sweden logo
Amazon Logo
Amdocs logo
AT&T
BRIA logo
Dropbox logo
Korea Telecom logo
Perplexity logo
Servicenow logo
shell logo
Resources
The Latest in NVIDIA NeMo Resources
Blogs
Sessions
Training
Videos
How to Train Scientific Agents with Reinforcement Learning
December 15, 2025
How to Train Scientific Agents with Reinforcement Learning
The scientific process can be repetitive and tedious, with researchers spending hours digging through papers, managing experiment workflows…
How to Build Privacy-Preserving Evaluation Benchmarks with Synthetic Data
December 12, 2025
How to Build Privacy-Preserving Evaluation Benchmarks with Synthetic Data
Validating AI systems requires benchmarks—datasets and evaluation workflows that mimic real-world conditions—to measure accuracy, reliability…
Train Small Orchestration Agents to Solve Big Problems
December 01, 2025
Train Small Orchestration Agents to Solve Big Problems
Using the right tool and model for a task is a challenging and ever-present engineering problem in agent design. At NVIDIA Research, we’re making fast progress…
Load More 
View All Blogs 






