Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) technologies have the potential to transform health care by deriving new and important insights from the vast amount of data generated during the delivery of health care every day. Medical device manufacturers are using these technologies to innovate their products to better assist health care providers and improve patient care. The complex and dynamic processes involved in the development, deployment, use, and maintenance of AI technologies benefit from careful management throughout the medical product life cycle.

On this page:
What Is Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning?
How Are Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML) Transforming Medical Devices?
How Is the FDA Considering Regulation of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Medical Devices?
Contact Us
Additional Resources
What Is Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning?
Artificial Intelligence is a machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments. Artificial intelligence systems use machine- and human-based inputs to perceive real and virtual environments; abstract such perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner; and use model inference to formulate options for information or action.

Machine Learning is a set of techniques that can be used to train AI algorithms to improve performance at a task based on data.

Some real-world examples of artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies include:

An imaging system that uses algorithms to give diagnostic information for skin cancer in patients.
A smart sensor device that estimates the probability of a heart attack.
Did you know the FDA has a digital health and artificial intelligence glossary? The FDA developed this glossary as an educational resource to help support consistent use of digital health and artificial intelligence terminology by the FDA and interested parties. 


How Are Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML) Transforming Medical Devices?
AI/ML technologies have the potential to transform health care by deriving new and important insights from the vast amount of data generated during the delivery of health care every day. Medical device manufacturers are using these technologies to innovate their products to better assist health care providers and improve patient care. One of the greatest benefits of AI/ML in software resides in its ability to learn from real-world use and experience, and its capability to improve its performance.

How Is the FDA Considering Regulation of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Medical Devices?
The FDA reviews medical devices through an appropriate premarket pathway, such as premarket clearance (510(k)), De Novo classification, or premarket approval. The FDA may also review and clear modifications to medical devices, including software as a medical device, depending on the significance or risk posed to patients of that modification. Learn the current FDA guidance for risk-based approach for 510(k) software modifications.

The FDA's traditional paradigm of medical device regulation was not designed for adaptive artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies. Many changes to artificial intelligence and machine learning-driven devices may need a premarket review.

On April 2, 2019, the FDA published a discussion paper "Proposed Regulatory Framework for Modifications to Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML)-Based Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) - Discussion Paper and Request for Feedback" that describes a potential approach to premarket review for artificial intelligence and machine learning-driven software modifications.

In January 2021, the FDA published the "Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Software as a Medical Device Action Plan" or "AI/ML SaMD Action Plan." Consistent with the action plan, the FDA later issued the following documents:

October 2021 - Good Machine Learning Practice for Medical Device Development: Guiding Principles
April 2023 - Draft Guidance: Marketing Submission Recommendations for a Predetermined Change Control Plan for Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML)-Enabled Device Software Functions
October 2023 - Predetermined Change Control Plans for Machine Learning-Enabled Medical Devices: Guiding Principles
June 2024 - Transparency for Machine Learning-Enabled Medical Devices: Guiding Principles
December 2024 - Final Guidance: Marketing Submission Recommendations for a Predetermined Change Control Plan for Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Device Software Functions
On March 15, 2024, the FDA published the "Artificial Intelligence and Medical Products: How CBER, CDER, CDRH, and OCP are Working Together," which represents the FDA's coordinated approach to AI. This paper is intended to complement the "AI/ML SaMD Action Plan" and represents a commitment between the FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), and the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), and the Office of Combination Products (OCP), to drive alignment and share learnings applicable to AI in medical products more broadly.

On January 6, 2025, the FDA published the Draft Guidance: Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Device Software Functions: Lifecycle Management and Marketing Submission Recommendations. This draft guidance proposes both lifecycle considerations and specific recommendations to support marketing submissions for AI-enabled medical devices. The draft guidance highlights recommendations from other guidances in order to assist manufacturers with applying those recommendations to AI-enabled devices, as well as providing additional recommendations on topics of specific relevance for AI. When final, the guidance is intended to be used in addition to other applicable guidances for a given device. Notably, this draft guidance is specific to AI-enabled medical devices. The FDA has also published draft guidance with recommendations regarding the use of AI to support development of drug and biological products. The publication of these guidances, among other actions, continues to demonstrate the agency's efforts to provide transparency and to help ensure product safety and effectiveness while supporting innovation in this rapidly growing field.