Overview
New technology comes with unknown obstacles and unintended risks requiring accountable design and lifecycle planning to ensure responsible innovation. As artificial intelligence, autonomous intelligent systems (AIS), machine learning, autonomous vehicles, and robotics advance at a rapid pace, careful considerations need to be made during development and implementation regarding humanity. At IEEE SA, our global community has developed resources and standards globally recognized in the area of applied ethics and systems engineering and continues to develop accessible and sustainable approaches and solutions for pragmatic application of AIS principles and frameworks. IEEE SA offers standards, training and education, certification programs, and more, to empower stakeholders designing, developing, and using AIS. Global participation is encouraged to offer the broadest regional and cultural perspectives required to best contextualize how AIS systems can avoid risk and offer greatest benefit in operation.

Featured
Hand holding globe
IEEE CertifAIEd™: The Mark of AI Ethics
For assessing ethics of AIS to help protect, differentiate, and grow product adoption.

Learn More About IEEE CertifAIEd™


IEEE Ethics for AI System Design Training
This training helps bridge the gap between principles and practice, enabling real-world implementation of ethically aligned systems design strategy from the planning phase.

Learn More About IEEE Ethics for AI System Design Training

Image of an AI Brain
IEEE Responsible Procurement of AI Training
This training provides a framework of the processes and procedures for procuring AI tools to help minimize risk in the purchasing lifecycle of AI and automated decision systems.

Learn More About IEEE Responsible Procurement of AI Training

Programs and Services
AIS Certification
IEEE CertifAIEd™ is a certification program for assessing ethics of AIS to help protect, differentiate, and grow product adoption. The resulting certificate and mark demonstrates the organization’s effort to deliver a solution with a more trustworthy AIS experience to their users.

Learn More About IEEE CertifAIEd™

Artificial Intelligence and Ethics in Design Course Program
This educational program offers 10 courses focused on ethics in design of artificial intelligence systems.

Learn More About The Artificial Intelligence and Ethics in Design Course Program

New Program for Free Access to AI Ethics and Governance Standards
Program brings sociotechnical standards providing guidance and considerations to aid the development of trustworthy AI to the global community at no cost.

View Free Standards

Get Involved
Learn more about how to engage with AIS related Communities and Industry Connections Programs.

The Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems
This community’s mission is to ensure every stakeholder involved in the development of AIS is educated and trained to prioritize ethical considerations so that these technologies are advanced for the benefit of humanity.

Learn More About The Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems

Pre-Standardization Activities On Industrial AI
Industrial AIS differs from consumer AIS applications. Participants from corporations, academia, industry, and government agencies collaborate to identify potential gaps that need to be bridged by new standards.

Learn More About Pre-Standardization Activities On Industrial AI

AI Systems Governance for Cities
The goal of the AI-Driven Innovation for Cities and People Team is to provide cities a mechanism to support responsible AIS innovation through proper governance mechanisms.

Learn More About AI Systems Governance for Cities

The Open Community for Ethics in Autonomous and Intelligent Systems (OCEANIS)
Sociotechnical standards can elevate and further the development of AIS solutions. This forum offers collaboration between relevant organizations to foster locally and globally applicable solutions.

Learn More About OCEANIS

Children's Tech Design Governance
A group of key industry, government, and policy stakeholders focus on developing standards and establishing frameworks and processes for age appropriate digital services and protecting children’s data.

Learn More About Children’s Tech Design Governance

